Negation as a Source of Error in Machine Translation
===================================================================
This repository contains code of the EMNLP2020 (Findings) paper "It's not a Non-Issue: Negation as a Source of Error in Machine Translation".  
Authors: Md Mosharaf Hossain, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Eduardo Blanco and Alexis Palmer  


## Step 1: Download WMT-2018 and WMT-2019 corpora 
To run the code, WMT-2018 and WMT-2019 corpora need to be downloaded.  
At first, the project directory is needed to set as current directory.   
run the script "download_wmt_files.sh" (execute permission of the script is required)  inside the "data" directory.
```bash
cd data
sh download_wmt_files.sh
```

## Step 2: Set-up environment
Python 3.5+ (recommended: Python 3.6)  
Python packages: list of packages are provided in env-setup/requirements.txt file.  

```bash
# Create virtual env (Assuming you have Python 3.5 or 3.6 installed in your machine) -> optional step
python3 -m venv your_location/negation-mt
source your_location/negation-mt/bin/activate

# Install required packages -> required step
pip install -r ./env-setup/requirements.txt
python -m spacy download en_core_web_sm
export HDF5_USE_FILE_LOCKING='FALSE'
```

## Step 3: Map source, reference, and system output 
At this step, we map source sentences with references and system outputs. We also put human evaluation score (z-score) for each system output.  
```bash
python map.py
```
Mapping files are created in the below locations:  
WMT-18: ./output/map_scores/2018/  
WMT-19: ./output/map_scores/2019/  
​

## Step 4: Extract with and without negation
At this step, we run the cue detector to get two samples: sentences with negations and sentences without negation, for each participating system of a language direction.  
```bash
python extract_negation.py
```
Output files will be created in below locations. "map_scores" directory contains with and without negation files. Whereas, "info" directory contains token-level cue information.  
WMT-18: ./output/map_scores/2018/  (e.g.,fien_uedin.5631_ref_neg.txt (with neg file), fien_uedin.5631_ref_noneg.txt (without neg file))
WMT-19: ./output/map_scores/2019/  
WMT-18: ./output/info/2018/  
WMT-19: ./output/info/2019/  

## Step 5: Generate ranking files
This step produces system-level ranking based on z-scores for WMT-2018 and WMT-2019. The ranking file also contains other numbers such as BLUE and chrF++ scores.
Please note that - for english to foreign language directions, with and without negation samples are created based on source language.
On the other hand, for foreign to english directions, samples are created based on reference translation.
```bash
python ranking.py
```
​
## Step 6: Results
The reported tables (1-4) can be generated by the below python script. The results might differ slightly as the cue detector detects slightly
deferent negated sentences in each run (because of random initialization of the network weights in each run).  
```bash
python results.py --table_no 1
```


